+++
title = "Google!"
date = "2011-11-23"
tags = ["algorithms", "complexity", "google", "internship", "princeton",
"quantum"]
+++

It's been many months since I've posted here, due mostly to an
extreme influx of work from classes and my jobs. But that doesn't mean
I've given up on this blog! Rather, I have a huge number of updates, which
I will only describe in short detail for now. In no particular order:

After working at the Summer School in Theoretical Computer Science at Princeton,
I went to one more conference the week after the school closed out. It was the
annual RANDOM/APPROX dual conference, also held at Princeton. It was extremely
interesting, with riveting talks by a variety of excellent speakers. I
particularly enjoyed the keynote address by David Williamson, who spoke of a new
generation of approximation algorithms called 'lightweight algorithms' that he
believes should and will define the future of the field. I saw a lot of really
interesting talks and having taken a graduate course on this last semester, I
was able to at least follow a good portion of most talks.

Next, I have begun my fall semester (actually by this point, it's more
than half done..)! I ended up taking two grad courses: Advanced Complexity
Theory with Sanjeev Arora and an Advanced Topics course (aka, new courses which
may or may not be kept in future semesters) on Information Theory with new
professor Mark Braverman. Both are extremely interesting and have gotten very
challenging. I think however that complexity theory started off much harder for
me since I haven't taken the undergraduate version of this course first,
but as we moved on to new material, I feel like I'm keeping up fairly well
with the class. As for information theory, it started off introducing really
cool ideas that were pretty straightforward to follow, but our most recent topic
of communication complexity is extremely difficult for someone with no prior
knowledge or experience with this. The class has a couple of PhD candidates who
are very familiar with this material, so I guess that somewhat helps a bit. But
it goes very fast and I need to constantly review my material. Nonetheless,
it's a ton of fun! I'm also an undergrad grader for COS 340, which
is called Reasoning about Computation. It's sort of an introduction to
theoretical CS through a variety of topics including probability, hashing,
algorithmic analysis, approximation algorithms, graph theory, and more. Lots of
super interesting material. It's by no means a trivial course (either to
take or to grade..) but it's an excellent jumping point for anyone
interested in theory. I actually haven't taken this course in the past due
to scheduling issues, so I'm enjoying following the material as the class
does it too.

We also had a Quantum Computing Day mini-workshop at Princeton. I'm hugely
interested in this subject although I have little formal background in it.
Nonetheless, I decided to attend anyway. The keynote talk was by Scott Aaronson
of MIT, a well-noted theorist in this field. The talk was, as you might expect,
brilliant. I'm pretty intrigued by how matrix determinants and permanents
keep popping up in so many different places. Aaronson showed the application of
those concepts in dealing with fermions and bosons, which given my limited
quantum physics knowledge was new to me. There was also another great talk by an
IBM researcher; this one a more applied talk about actually building larger
multi-qubit gates while dealing with the immensely complicated issues of
maintaining the superposition. The talk was very positive and the speaker showed
that IBM has made a lot of progress in pinning down some of the problems.
Although many believe QC is just a fad and will never actually make it to
utility, I'm optimistic to see and follow real progress being made. If for
nothing else, for science.

Finally, one more big news. I was offered an internship at Google in NYC! I had
interviewed with Google late last year and made it to the host matching round.
However, since it was already so late, there weren't any available
projects for me. Luckily, working through a recruiter over a summer, I was able
to get a headstart on the process this year and was also waived through the
technical interviews since I had done them just a few months prior. I was paired
up with a prospective host from the NYC office and that interview went well.
Before I could hear back, I was also paired up with a host from the Mountain
View office and had that interview as well. In the end, it turned out that both
hosts' reactions were positive, but I chose NYC for a variety of reasons,
mostly convenience. I'm extremely excited about this opportunity and
I'm eagerly waiting for the summer! The team I will be working on is Site
Reliability Engineering (SRE) and my project is something to do with security.

So those are the big news items from the past few months. Hopefully, I will have
time to keep this updated more regularly hereon.

**EDIT**: One more thing! The research that I worked on with a few other
undergraduates and my professor from the summer of freshman year has finally
been published and presented at IMC 2011 in Germany early in November! The paper
is also now online [here][1] (I think this might be behind a paywall).

A direct link is also available [here][2].

 [1]: http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2068816.2068864&coll=DL&dl=ACM&CFID=70033822&CFTOKEN=34586265
 [2]: http://conferences.sigcomm.org/imc/2011/docs/p515.pdf
