+++
categories = []
date = "2013-07-25T03:15:25Z"
description = ""
keywords = []
title = "Chromecast, Nexus 7, and Android 4.3"
tags = [ "android", "bluetooth", "chromecast", "cyanogenmod", "google",
"google voice", "GPU", "hardware", "nexus", "programming"]
+++

Today, Google introduced some pretty sweet new hardware and software. I'm most
excited about Chromecast and Android 4.3. I'd be way more excited about the new
Nexus 7 if I were to be purchasing one, but given that I have the older one
already, I probably won't.

Chromecast is especially nice because it's a huge upgrade from what the Nexus Q
would have been at a fraction of the cost. I think this is a pretty big step
forward for connecting different Google services and devices seamlessly. I like
that it works from a variety of devices and Netflix as well. It'd be even
better if it was an open API that any app could hook into, but I'm doubtful if
that's on the agenda. At $35 though, it's plenty more than what I would have
expected it to do.

It's pretty incredible how easily Chrome can sync a variety of different
settings, apps, extensions, etc between computers. When the very first app and
extension to share browser tabs between a computer and mobile device was
launched, I thought it was the coolest thing. Now, it's become second nature to
look at the Other Devices tab on the Chrome Android app on my tablet and
instantly open up the same page on different devices. What's particularly
interesting to me though is that this Chromecast device runs a version of
_Chrome OS_, not Android. For a long time, people have been saying that Chrome
OS and Android are on a crash course since they're covering a lot of similar
form factors and emerging product lines.  I like their relationship here:
Chrome OS on the device, interfacing with Android (as well as other OS with
Chrome) on the client side.

But I'm still unsure as to whether Chrome OS is the best choice for the
software. At the end of the day, it's just a bit more than a plain Linux kernel
but it's curious that a full-fledged operating system has been stripped down to
make an embedded device rather than an operating system specifically designed
for mobile devices. I wonder what the rationale for that decision was, but
  regardless, it gets the job done.

On the Nexus 7 side, this is a tremendous upgrade of hardware for a small price
bump. It's very excellent to see a notification LED on the new Nexus 7, as this
is one my most favorite features of my Android phone over my old iPhone.
Colored notifications pertaining to different apps (customizable in some ROMs)
can efficiently (battery-wise) and quickly convey a lot of information without
the expense of a full device wake-up. The camera in the back is also a nice
touch since everyone seems to care about that (recall that it was thought that
the original N7 had designated space inside for a back camera but was not
present) but I don't much see the appeal of it. I hope the front camera has
improved though since that's more useful for video conferencing. The GPU bump
is a very nice one too. It's curious that they decided to switch away from the
Tegra line with this generation but the performance gains make up for it (at
least based on initial third-party benchmarks) I think. I much preferred the
perforated back of the original N7 to this generation but I like the sideways
&#8220;NEXUS&#8221; branding more just because it's more distinctive. I'll have
to get a hold of a device before I can judge if physical dimension changes are
noticeable to me.

Android 4.3 was the main thing I was looking forward to today and it seems like
it has some nice improvements. It's cool to see that apps can now tap into the
notification stream. Thinking about it now, it seems a bit odd that such
control was not previously available in an obvious, &#8220;correct&#8221; way
before. My first thought was that it'd certainly improve the current mechanism
that CyanogenMod's Voice+ implementation works, rather than canceling a
notification from Google Voice _after_ it has been displayed before doing its
magic. But of course, I expect that to change to a more robust mechanism
regardless over time anyway. The other nice thing is that ActionBar is now part
of the compatibility library! This is a really welcome change but it's
surprising it took this long. I also appreciate the Bluetooth improvement but
we'll have to see if it improves reliability as well since this is a common
complaint that I've heard. I don't use it much personally though. I'm also
really interested in the improvements to the rendering pipeline in this
version. More multi-threaded rendering is certainly welcome and I hope 2D
rendering performance will improve on the Galaxy Nexus as well (I have no doubt
it'll help on newer devices). I'm yet to dig more into the SDK changes but I
like what I'm seeing so far!

So on the whole, nothing earth-shattering today, but still a few good surprises
and positive changes overall according to me. I like these kind of incremental
fixes and improvements over a big dump of everything new in one shot at I/O.
This feels closer to an actual development cycle and feels more responsive to
actual feedback as well. I really should pick up one of those Chromecast
devices..
